{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red251\green0\blue7;\red109\green109\blue109;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue233;\red0\green0\blue83;\red38\green0\blue83;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15140\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth13120\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth12680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clpadt200 \clpadl200 \clpadb200 \clpadr200 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 FINAL EXAMS - IMPORTANT\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \strokec4 Log into your Mosaic account to access exam information.
\b0 \'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://registrar.mcmaster.ca/exams/requirements/"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Exam\'a0
\fs20 G
\fs24 uidelines}}\'a0|\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://registrar.mcmaster.ca/exams/exam-timetable/"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Time and location of your exam}}\'a0[in case of\'a0
\fs20 a\'a0
\fs24 possible change in time/day (due to weather, emergencies, etc.) keep checking this page for announcements; note: this webpage might take some time to load]\
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\i \cf4 \ul \ulc4 Note
\i0 \ulnone : dates for exams are set by the University, and cannot be changed.\'a0
\b If for some reason you think you will not be able to write the final exam on the scheduled day/time
\b0 , you must talk to a student adviser in your faculty office. Final exams are organized by the University, and not by your instructor - so\'a0
\b your instructor cannot help you with this, you need to go to your faculty office
\b0 .
\f1 \cell \lastrow\row

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth13120\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw40\brdrcf3 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth12680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clpadt200 \clpadl200 \clpadb200 \clpadr200 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420\sa360\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \strokec2 *** MATH 1LT3 FINAL EXAM ***
\f1 \cf4 \strokec4 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \strokec2 IMPORTANT INFORMATION - PLEASE READ CAREFULLY
\f1\b0 \cf4 \strokec4 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf4 Location for your exams is determined according to your last name.\'a0
\b Make sure that you know in which building and in which room you write the exam.
\b0\fs24 \'a0
\fs20 If your last name is split between two locations then you can write your exam at either location.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs20 \cf4 Come ON TIME to the RIGHT LOCATION. Bring your Mac ID, or if you lost it, any government-issued picture ID.
\b0 \'a0If you do not have your ID with you, a new ID card will be issued to you at the exam location, and you will have to pay for it.
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\b\fs20 Calculators allowed:
\b0 \'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.bookstore.mcmaster.ca/cgi-mcm/ws/gmdetail.exe?pwsPRODIDG1=2207018&sType=gm&proddesc=Casio%20fx-991%20Calculator"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 McMaster standard calculator only}}, i.e., Casio fx991MS or Casio fx991MS PLUS.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf4 Exam is\'a0
\b 2.5 hours long.
\f1\b0\fs24 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs20 \cf4 If you think YOU WILL MISS THE EXAM FOR ANY REASON
\b0 , you must contact the office of Associate Dean of YOUR faculty (if you are in Science, go to BSB-129).\'a0
\b Please do not go to your instructor, as your instructor cannot help you with this.
\f1\b0\fs24 \

\f0\b\fs20 If you FEEL SICK DURING THE EXAM
\b0 , you will have to make a decision: either to (a) stop writing, identify yourself to the invigilator, get proper documentation and contact the office of Associate Dean of YOUR faculty, or (b) continue writing. In case of (a), you might be granted a deferral (i.e. chance to write the exam at a later date); however, if you decide to stay and complete the exam (no matter how sick you feel), you will not be granted a deferral, and your exam will be used to calculate your final mark.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf4 The\'a0
\b DEFERRED
\b0 \'a0exam is usually written several months later. Ask a student adviser in your faculty office or the Registrar about exact dates of deferred exams. The deferred exam is similar to the actual exam, same level of difficulty, and all announcements below apply to a deferred exam as well. Final course grades for deferred exams are calculated in exactly the same way as for everyone else in the course.
\f1 \

\f0 Please keep in mind that your final course grade is based on your\'a0
\b best two tests and the exam only.
\b0 \'a0
\b I cannot offer any kind of extra work with the purpose of improving marks.
\b0 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa120\qc\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf4 \
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf4 \

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth12000\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth11720\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt100 \clpadl100 \clpadb100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \strokec2 MATERIAL COVERED ON THE EXAM\'a0
\b0 \cf4 \strokec4 \uc0\u8232 \cf6 \strokec6 [to see what to study within each section, follow SCHEDULE AND HOMEWORK link]\cf4 \strokec4 \
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl320\sa280\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf6 \strokec6 From the hardcover textbook (differential equations): sections 8.1-8.7 [you might also want to review sections 7.1, 7.2, and 7.5 which were covered in 1LS3 but will help you to understand the material in Chapter 8 better]\
Functions of Several Variables module: sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10.\
Probability and Statistics module: sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14.\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs24 \cf4 \strokec4 \'a0\

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth12000\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth11720\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt100 \clpadl100 \clpadb100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \strokec2 TO PREPARE
\b0 \cf4 \strokec4 \
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 (1)\'a0
\b Study your class notes
\b0 . All theory and the most relevant examples are done in lectures. Make sure that you can do all exercises that were done in class without referring to your notes.\
(2)
\b \'a0Look over your assignments and textbook homework questions.\'a0
\b0 You will not have time to re-do all of these but it will help if you at least look over the problems and think of how you would go about solving each type of problem and make note of the different variations that occur.\
(3)\'a0
\b Re-write the tests that you wrote this term ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ms.mcmaster.ca/~clemene/1LT3/pdfs/Math1LT3_T1_feb2017.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 blank test 1}}\'a0|\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ms.mcmaster.ca/~clemene/1LT3/pdfs/Math1LT3_T2_mar2017.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 blank test 2}}\'a0|\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ms.mcmaster.ca/~clemene/1LT3/pdfs/Math1LT3_T3_mar2017.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 blank test 3}}), as well as the sample tests
\b0 \'a0that have been posted under the TERM TESTS link. Attempt to do all test questions without referring to solutions. When you're done, use the solutions to grade your tests. Make sure that you understand the things that you did not do correctly, so that you do not repeat the same mistakes.\
(4)\'a0
\b Attempt the sample final exam posted\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ms.mcmaster.ca/~clemene/1LT3/pdfs/1lt3efinalexam_winter2015.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 here}}\'a0without referring to your notes
\b0 . Do this last, when you feel that your studying is complete, so you can check to see if you really do know your material.\
(5)\'a0
\b Attend the review session.
\b0 \'a0Details for the review session will be posted soon.\

\itap3\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth4680\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4520\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf3 \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs20 \cf7 \ul \ulc7 \strokec7 Final Exam Review Session
\f1\fs24 \cf4 \ulnone \strokec4 \
\pard\intbl\itap3\pardeftab720\sl220\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf7 \strokec7 Date: Friday, April 21st
\f1\fs24 \cf4 \strokec4 \

\f0\fs20 \cf7 \strokec7 Time: 2:30pm - 4:30pm
\f1\fs24 \cf4 \strokec4 \

\f0\fs20 \cf7 \strokec7 Room: BSB/B135
\f1\fs24 \cf4 \strokec4 \

\f0\fs20 \cf7 \strokec7 Presenter: Becky Hooper
\fs24 \cf4 \strokec4 \nestcell \lastrow\nestrow\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth12000\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth11720\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt100 \clpadl100 \clpadb100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \strokec2 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
\b0 \cf4 \strokec4 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 (1) The exam is very similar to the format of the sample 1LT3 exam posted above:\'a0
\b 15 pages with questions
\b0 ; so, it is about twice the size of a term test - but you have 2.5 hours to do it. Page 17 is for rough work and page 18 contains a partial table of values for F(z) so you can detach this page from your exam if you would like.\
(2) The exam covers all material that we did in the course.\'a0
\b Mark breakdown
\b0 \'a0(out of a total of 75 marks): chapter 8 material (from the hardcover textbook) - 16 marks; functions of several variables module - 30 marks; probability and statistics module - 29 marks.\
(3) Exam questions include\'a0
\b twelve multiple choice questions
\b0 , 2 points each (24 out of 75 points) and\'a0
\b three true/false questions
\b0 , 2 points each (6 of 75 points). Except on multiple choice questions, you have to show work to obtain full credit.\
(4) Look at solutions to tests, assignments and sample tests to see
\b \'a0how to write solutions
\b0 ; even if a solution looks short (and maybe obvious) you must give some support for your answer. Keep in mind that what you wrote is what is marked, and not what you thought; make sure your answers are correct and complete.\
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 (5)
\b \'a0Be prepared for disturbances and stress during the exam
\b0 ; because of circumstances (stress, large room, lots of people, disturbances, etc.), when you first look at the exam, it might appear difficult; spend 1-2 minutes reading the questions first, identify what you can do right away, and start working on these questions.\
(6)\'a0
\b You may write your exam in
\b0 \'a0
\b pencil or pen.
\b0 \'a0Your exam is not returned to you (and solutions are not posted), but if you would like to review your exam after final marks are released on Mosaic, you can apply to do so by following the procedure outlined here:\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.math.mcmaster.ca/index.php/undergraduate-studies/41-undergraduate-studies/473-exam-review-info.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 \strokec5 Exam Review Information}}\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow

\itap2\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trwWidth12000\trftsWidth3 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clwWidth11720\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt100 \clpadl100 \clpadb100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\qc\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \strokec2 \
CHECKLIST
\b0 \cf4 \strokec4 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\intbl\itap2\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 HARDCOVER TEXTBOOK:\
(1)\'a0What are autonomous DEs? Pure-time DEs? How do we check that a function is a solution of a given initial value problem?\'a0Do you know how to set up Euler's method for a single equation, and for a system of equations, such as predator-prey?\
(2)\'a0Did you review integration from chapter 7 (including integration using substitution and integration by parts)?\'a0What is a relative rate of change (per capita rate)? What is the solution of the basic exponential model P'=kP, with P(0)=P_0? Did you study logistic and modified logistic equations? What is the biological meaning of the parameters in these equations?\'a0Did you study the basic model for the spread of a disease?\
(3)\'a0How do we find equilibria of autonomous DEs? Can you draw and interpret phase-line diagrams? Can you determine stability of equilibria using a phase-line diagram and/or the Stability Theorem? Did you practice solving separable DEs?\
(4) Did you study systems of DEs, such as the predator-prey model?\'a0Can you draw a phase-plane diagram including nullclines, direction arrows, and a phase-plane trajectory? Can you identify the equilibria of a system of two DEs?\
SEVERAL VARIABLES:\
(4)\'a0Did you study domain and range questions from Section 1? Can you recognize the graph of a function f(x,y) from its equation? Can you create a contour map for a function?\'a0Can you state Definition 7 (limit) in words? How do we show that a limit does not exist? How do we prove that a function is continuous at a point (a,b)? Which functions of two variables are continuous?\
(5) Can you write the definition of a partial derivative? Do you know how to calculate and interpret partial derivatives? Second order partial derivatives? Can you determine the sign of a partial (or second order partial) derivative of a function from its graph, table of values, or contour map?\'a0Did you memorize the formula for the linearization of a function f(x,y) at (a,b)? [Note: The quadratic approximation will not be on the exam.]\'a0What is the relation between partial derivatives and differentiability (Theorem 6 on page 58)?\'a0How can you prove that a function is differentiable at a point (a,b)?\
(6) How do we compute and interpret a directional derivative? What are the largest and the smallest values of the directional derivative (Theorem 15, page 104)? Do you know the properties of the gradient, as listed in Theorem 16 (page 106)? What is a critical point? Did you practice calculating critical points (solving systems of two equations)? What is the definition of a local maximum? A local minimum? What is a saddle point?\'a0Did you practice applying the second derivatives test (you need to remember the formula for D)? Can you show a function has an extreme value or saddle point using an alternative\'a0argument?\
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS:\
(7) What is a sample space? Simple event? Probability? Do you know formulas in Theorems 2, 3 (pages 28, 29)? How do we define conditional probability? Independence? What is the difference between independent events and mutually exclusive events?\
(8) What does the Law of Total Probability say? Did you memorize Bayes' formula? Do you know the definition of independent events? What is a random variable? Probability mass function? Cumulative distribution function? How do you compute the mean, variance, standard deviation of a discrete RV?\'a0Are you familiar with Theorem 7 (page 78) and Theorem 8 (page 94)?\
(9) What is a Bernuolli trial/random variable? A binomial random variable? How do we define the binomial distribution, i.e., what does b(k,n;p) mean? Did you memorize the formula in Theorem 11 on page 117? What are the mean and the variance of a binomial distribution? Are you able to recognize when a random variable has a binomial distribution?\
(10) What is a continuous random variable? What is a probability density function, and what are its properties? How do we find the mean and the variance of a continuous RV? Do you know the formula in Definition 39, page 167? Can you graph the normal distribution illustrating the properties in Theorem 14? What is the standard normal distribution? How do we use it to compute probabilities? What is the 68-95-99.7 rule? How do we compute F(-z)? [Note:\'a0You may want to review improper integral and L'Hopital's Rule from your 1LS3 textbook to help with questions in sections 13 and 14.]\nestcell \lastrow\nestrow\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa280\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf4 \'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs24 \cf4 \'a0\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl440\sa360\partightenfactor0

\b\fs36 \cf4 \
\'a0\
}